Slang LLVM Targets
==================

The LLVM targets are capable of creating LLVM IR and object code for arbitrary
target triples (`<machine>-<vendor>-<os>`, e.g. `x86_64-unknown-linux`). This
allows for highly performant and debuggable Slang code on almost any platform,
as long as an LLVM backend exists for it.

The current state is highly experimental and there are many missing features.
The feature also focuses heavily on CPUs for now.

## Targets

The HOST / SHADER split from the [CPU target](cpu-target.md) applies here as well.

The following targets always use LLVM:
* `llvm-ir` / `SLANG_HOST_LLVM_IR` generates LLVM IR in the text representation, suitable for free-standing functions.
* `llvm-shader-ir` / `SLANG_SHADER_LLVM_IR` generates LLVM IR for compute shader entry points.

The following targets use LLVM when `-emit-cpu-via-llvm` or `EmitCPUMethod=SLANG_EMIT_CPU_VIA_LLVM` is specified:
* `host-object-code` / `SLANG_HOST_OBJECT_CODE` generates position-independent object code, which can be
linked into an executable or a static or dynamic library.
* `shader-object-code` / `SLANG_OBJECT_CODE` generates object code for compute shader entry points.
* `SLANG_HOST_HOST_CALLABLE` and `SLANG_SHADER_HOST_CALLABLE` JIT compile the module.

Support for `exe` / `SLANG_HOST_EXECUTABLE` and `sharedlib` /
`SLANG_HOST_SHARED_LIBRARY` may be added later, once the LLVM target has
stabilized. For compiling to platforms other than the current CPU running the
Slang compiler, the following options are provided:

* `-llvm-target-triple <target-triple>`. The default is the host machine's triple.
* `-llvm-cpu <cpu-name>` sets the target CPU, similar to Clang's `-mcpu=<cpu-name>`.
* `-llvm-features <features>` sets the available features, similar to LLC's `-mattr=<features>`.

## Features

* Compile stand-alone programs in Slang for platforms supported by LLVM
* Focus on memory layout correctness: type layouts such as the scalar layout are handled correctly
* Does not depend on external compilers (although, currently depends on external linkers!)
* Works well with debuggers!

## Standalone programs

You can write functions decorated with `export` to make them visible from the
resulting object code, and `__extern_cpp` to unmangle their names. So, for a
standalone Slang application, the entry point is:

```slang
export __extern_cpp int main(int argc, NativeString* argv)
{
    // Do whatever you want here!
    return 0;
}
```

To cross-compile, you can use `-llvm-target-triple <target-triple>`. For now,
you'll need to compile into an object file and use a compiler or linker to turn
that into an executable, e.g. with `clang main.o -o main.exe`.

## Application Binary Interface

This section defines the ABI rules which code generated by the LLVM target
follows and expects of external code calling into it.

The default type layout aligns vectors to the next power of two, structures are
aligned and padded up to the largest alignment among their fields, and booleans
are a single byte.

If you specify a different layout with flags like `-fvk-use-c-layout` or
`-fvk-use-scalar-layout`, all structure and array types on the stack and heap
will follow those layout rules.

### Special type memory layouts

* `StructuredBuffer` and `ByteAddressBuffer` are stored as `{ Type* data; intptr_t size; }`,
  where `size` is the number of elements in `data`.

* `Texture` and `SamplerState` types are stored as opaque pointers. Combined
  image samplers (`Sampler2D` etc.) are `{ void* texture; void* sampler; }`.

* Vectors are passed as LLVM vector types; there's no direct equivalent in standard C or C++.

* Matrix types are lowered into arrays of vectors. Column and row major matrices are supported as normal.

### Textures

In the LLVM target, texture types are fully user-defined and user-implemented,
but they still use the familiar `RWTexture2D<T>`, `Texture2D<T>`, etc. types and
their member functions.

The core module treats these types as opaque pointers. It never attempts to
dereference them in any way, so you can define them as anything as long as it's
pointer-sized (like `uint2` on a 64-bit target). It is possible to use `bit_cast`
to convert the texture and sampler types to whatever concrete type.

The core module forward-declares all texture operations, for example:

```slang
extern T.TexelElement llvmTextureLoad<T:ITexture>(T tex, vector<int, T.coordDimensions> location, int levelOrSampleIndex);
```

Which the user must then implement if they wish to use the related functionality:

```slang
// Must be defined in a user module before compiling to IR or object code.
export T.TexelElement llvmTextureLoad<T:ITexture>(
    T tex,
    vector<int, T.coordDimensions> location,
    int levelOrSampleIndex)
{
    if (T is RWTexture2D<float4>)
    {
        CPUTextureType* type = bitcast<MyCPUTextureType*>(T);
        float4 texel = loadFromMyTextureType(type, int2(location[0], location[1]), levelOrSampleIndex);
        // This cast is a no-op, but necessary due to how generic type-checking operates.
        return (el as T.TexelElement).value;
    }
    return {};
}
```

[Check out all `llvmTexture*` functions from the docs](https://docs.shader-slang.org/en/latest/search.html?q=llvmTexture)
to see what you need to implement to get all texture functionality. You can get
away with only implementing the functions you need. You can use the `ITexture`
interface to observe at compile time what kind of texture is being used.

Note that this doesn't mean that you'd actually have to write your texture
sampling functionality in Slang (although you can if you want to). You can use
these `llvmTexture*` functions as routers that just call the relevant external
C functions, forwarding the opaque texture pointers to them. This way, you don't
need your concrete texture type to be available to Slang at all.

### Aggregate parameters

All aggregates (structs and arrays) are always passed by reference in Slang's
LLVM emitter. Other than that, the target platform's C calling conventions are
followed. This stems from [LLVM not handling aggregates correctly](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/passing-structs-to-c-functions/83938/8) in calling conventions, and requiring every frontend to painstakingly
reimplement the same per-target logic if they want full C compatibility.

This means that if you declare a function like this in Slang:
```slang
export __extern_cpp MyStruct func(MyStruct val);
```

It would have the following signature in C:
```slang
void func(const MyStruct *val, MyStruct *returnval);
```

In other words, aggregate parameters are turned into pointers and aggregate
return values are turned into an additional pointer-typed parameter at the end
of the parameter list.

### FFI / C foreign functions

Due to the aggregate parameter passing limitation of LLVM, calling arbitrary C
functions from Slang is complicated, and a hypothetical binding generator would
need to generate calling convention adapter functions. A binding generator would
be a useful tool to include, but remains as future work.

## Limitations

The LLVM target support is work-in-progress, and there are currently many
limitations.

### CPU targets only

Currently, support is limited to conventional CPU targets. The emitted LLVM IR
is not compatible with LLVMs SPIR-V target, for example. At least resource
bindings and pointer address spaces would have to be accounted for to expand
support to GPU targets. Slang already has native emitters for GPU targets, so
you can use those instead of going through LLVM.

### Missing compute shader features

* No `groupshared`
* No barriers.
* No atomics.
* No wave operations.

These limitations stem from the fact that work items / threads of a work group
are currently run serially instead of actually being in parallel. This may be
improved upon later.

### Limited vectorization

Vector instructions are vectorized in the way typical CPU math libraries
(e.g. GLM) vectorize, as long as the target CPU allows for vector instructions.
This is worse than how GPUs do it, where each work item / thread gets a SIMD
lane. This aspect may be improved upon later.

### Compatibility with prior CPU Slang features

There are limitations regarding features of the existing C++ based [CPU target](./cpu-target.md).
The following features are not yet supported:

* `String` type.
* `new`.
* `class`.
* COM interfaces.

The implementations of these rely on C++ features, and are not trivial to
implement in LLVM. Support for them may be added later.

### Missing types

* No acceleration structures.

These are missing due to limitation of scope for the implementation, and may be
added soon.

## Gotchas

### Out-of-bounds buffer access

Attempting to index past the end of any buffer type is undefined behaviour. It
is not guaranteed to return zero as in HLSL; segmentation faults and memory
corruption are more than likely to occur!
